# DOM - 102

## Prior Knowledge

- Comfortable with the nested structure of the DOM
- Comfortable setting up an HTML file and linking associated css and js files
- Understand how to use DOM methods to fetch elements
- Knowledge of a few types of events
- Understand what an event listener is & how to use them
- Understanding of asynchronous code and promises

## Learning Objectives

- Understand how forms work
- Be able to use `fetch` to make asynchronous requests
- Improve use of DOM methods and semantic html
- Be able to provide inline UI (user interface) validation
- Be able to interact with local storage

## 1. Forms

Forms used to be the pre-eminent way of passing data around the internet.

The **action** attribute part of a form expects a url, an endpoint to which data is sent (like an API).

The **method** attribute expects a HTTP methods like `GET` or `POST`. `POST` requests don't display the URL so should be used for sensitive data.

The controls to collect data in an html form come in a variety - text input, radio buttons... They have developed to accept **types** which are parsed by browsers. [Here's a full list of input types on w3schools](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/att_input_type.asp).

> As http servers should have no state (a `RESTFUL` principle) all the information had to come from the client, even if it wasn't something the user had knowledge of; to input `hidden` was one way round that.

## Semantic HTML & Accessibility

Now that we are designing front end applications, we need to bear in mind accessibility for users and browsers.

Semantic HTML means using the correct HTML elements for their correct purpose as much as possible: a `ul` tag for a list, not a series of nested `div`s

- **Labels** are a semantic html element that doesn't render as anything special but adds usability by allowing the user to click on the label to select the input. The `for` attribute of the `label` should be equal to the `id` attribute of the `input`, and the `input` has to be a child of the label.
- **Buttons** have some suitable styling applied by default (which you will probably want to override), they also have default keyboard accessibility — they can be tabbed between, and activated using Return/Enter.
- Other ones you might use might be `header`, `footer` or `article` tags rather than plan old `div`s!

Some useful articles on what semantic html is and why its needed:

> [The Importance of Semantic HTML](https://medium.com/adalab/the-importance-of-semantic-html-78e74fb75ff0)

> [Semantic HTML](https://internetingishard.com/html-and-css/semantic-html/)

## 2. Fetch

HTML forms use to handle all the data to be sent and where to send it to, but now we can take back control with Javascript and the DOM.

> You may see XMLHttpRequest dotted around in online documentation - this used to be the main way to make external requests, used by `Ajax`.

[Fetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) is a neater solution available in all modern browsers. MDN provides a good [guide to using fetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API/Using_Fetch).

To use `fetch`, provide a url and it will make a GET request by default. Note the response body is a **readable stream** and must be converted to json using the asyncronous `response.json()` method. It is promise based so you can use `then` to handle the asynchonicity.

```js
// a generic GET request using fetch 
 fetch(url)
 .then(buffer => buffer.json())
 .then(res => )
```

> NOTE: Fetch is a browser implementation and is not available in `node`.

## 3. Validation

When developing online forms your job is to alert the user if their inputs are incorrect and would be rejected by the api. If the user has not completed the fields (or filled them incorrectly) then there is no point making an api call to sign them up. When you try and sign in without providing information websites will often prompt you to complete the fields before trying to submit. This is `front-end` or `client-side` validation.

A nice guide on form design can be found [here](https://mono.company/design-practice/the-10-commandments-of-good-form-design-on-the-web/).

#### In general here are some common rules for client side validation

| Good                                                          | Bad                                                                                                |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Confirmation of completed fields when you move on to the next | Not validating until the whole thing is completed and having to go back to it to correct mistakes. |
| Clear prompts of what's expected e.g. password restrictions   | Unclear what the restrictions are.                                                                 |
| Errors are pointed out before you submit.                     | Validating too early. When you're halfway through typing something.                                |
| Clear colour schemes, green is good, red is bad.              | Placeholders disappearing when you start typing.                                                   |
| Good tabbing, sort-codes are a great example of this.         | Everything nested so you can't tab between                                                         |
| Progress Bars for long forms.                                 | Deleting all the input on submission so you have to re-type                                        |

|

> Some things have to be validated `server-side`, e.g. a new username that hasn't been taken. Do as much as possible client-side to smooth out this experience. A form is the final point of a sale and should be treated as such.

### Confirmations

We can use an event listeners to trigger responses to users filling in forms. Consider carefully how you want responses to be generated. If you want to evaluate a user's input as they type, use `change`. If you want to evaluate when they move to the next field, use `blur`. Other common ones that may be of interest are `change`, `input`, `submit`, `click`, `blur`, and `focus` - a list of events can be found [here on w3schools](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/dom_obj_event.asp).

## 4. Local Storage

HTML5 is the latest widely adopted variation of the language browsers use to read information. It comes with some new additions, including a few html tags, but also APIs for [localStorage](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Storage) (no more cookies), media players, canvas & svg, and many others.

Local storage allows you to save and later access data on the browser without needing to save it in a database. Common uses might be storing who is logged in.

There are 4 main local storage methods:

- set, 
- get
- remove item,
- clear - to empty everything.

We can only store strings in localStorage, so if you have an object you'll need to `stringify` it. Storage is domain specific and the size of storage available is browser dependant but most are 10mb (Safari is 5mb, android Browser is 2mb). If you have a string over 10mb, you are storing too much data!
