# DOM 101

```js
document.getElementById('dog');
```

This is Javascript interacting with the DOM (Document Object Model) and its properties / methods, rather than JAvascript itself. Other language can do this.

## HTML Page

All of the HTML page is wrapped in an <html /> tag - this tells the browser which mark up language to interpret (xml is another possibility).

Some of the other major tags involved are the head, which provides some info to the browser about what to include in the project, e.g. links, and other meta-information e.g. title.

The body of the document is what you see on the page!

It's also common to see Javascript extracted into a script tag, though JS can be written inline too.

## How the Browser Works

- The browser makes an HTTP request to our server.

- The server will respond with the HTTP response, incuding an HTML body (hopefully).

- The browser passes the HTML body to its engine. In Safari/Chrome this is Webkit. (Firefox uses Gecko and IE uses Trident.)

- The engine will parse the HTML, and start building the elements one by one. If in that order, it first parses the head, then body, then script tag (passed to the browser's JS engine - something like V8).

- Once the JS engine finishes a process called 'tokenising', which is sort of like parsing, it can run the code.

## The DOM as a tree

The DOM is a tree structure. Our tree starts with a root node, which is `document.documentElement` - or the HTML tag that we start building with.

Then it has children. The DOM provides methods to all you to traverse an element's children with some kind of loop, or you can go to the very first child or the very last child with commands like:

```js
document.documentElement.firstChildElement;
document.documentElement.lastChildElement;
```

You can also refer to nodes by their siblings, for example

```js
document.body.previousSibling;
document.body.nextSibling;
```

## Fetching Elements

We can see this whole structure in the elements tab of our inspector. We could also console log out the document and hone in on a certain thing with commands like

```js
document.getElementById('hi');
```

Because the DOM is built as a tree, navigating it is inefficient. The implementations of how this navigation differ between browsers, but we know it has to use recursion under the hood, otherwise it can't possibly see deeply nested elements. This is one example:

```js
let pTags = document.getElementsByTagName('p');
```

Methods like this (that `getElements...`) do not return an array, but an `HTMLcollection`. As an array like object, when can index it, but not use array methods. To do this, it needs to be spread into a new array:

```js
const pTags = [...document.getElementsByTagName('p')];
const pTagStr = pTags.reduce((str, p) => `${str} ${p.innerText}`, '');
```

Similarly, with class names:

```js
const poemClasses = [...document.getElementsByClassName('poem')];
const poem = poemClasses
  .reduce((poem, line) => `${poem}${line.innerText}\n`, '')
  .trim();
```

Here's an example that uses the wildcard to fetch all elements:

```js
const allItems = [...document.getElementsByTagName('*')];
const shoppingItems = allItems.filter(
  item => /^[0-9]+\./.test(item.innerText) && !/[\r\n]/g.test(item.innerText)
);
const shoppingList = shoppingItems
  .reduce((list, item) => `${list}${item.innerText}\n`, '')
  .trim();
console.log(shoppingList);
```

## Manipulating the DOM

The DOM is clearly incredibly powerful - there is a huge amount of language and functionality attached to this 'document object'. For Sam's project phase he made a Google Chrome extension that interacted with the DOM of every website you went onto. Whenever the extension found a link which our backend team had flagged as a news site, it injected a flag next to the link, alerting the user to how reputable the source was. And this worked on every website.

We can manipulate the html that has been returned to the browser in the console:

```js
const imgs = [...document.getElementsByTagName('img')];
imgs.forEach(
  img =>
    (img.src =
      'http://i0.kym-cdn.com/entries/icons/facebook/000/011/365/GRUMPYCAT.jpg')
);
```

Another way we could have found all the images is with a query selector. `document.querySelector` will return an HTML element, `document.querySelectorAll` returns a `NodeList`. NodeLists are similar to HTML collections in that they are array-like objects, but they have more ways of enumerating - they have a .forEach method attached, as well as keys, values and entries.

```js
const imgs = document.querySelectorAll('img');
imgs.forEach(
  img =>
    (img.src =
      'http://i0.kym-cdn.com/entries/icons/facebook/000/011/365/GRUMPYCAT.jpg')
);
```

HTML collections are considered a bit of an 'artifact' as NodeLists are more powerful, but both are used and different browsers may return different things.

We can add functions to nodes by attaching them to the event handlers hooks provided. This is a simple way to attach functionality.

```js
const emoji = document.getElementById('smiley');
emoji.onclick = getMoreAngry;
function getLessAngry() {
  emoji.innerText = '😠';
  emoji.onclick = getMoreAngry;
}

function getMoreAngry() {
  emoji.innerText = '😡';
  emoji.onclick = getLessAngry;
}
```

However it is considered better form to use `.addEventListener` - this allows you to isolate your code in your script tag, which is better for readability and testing.

```js
emoji.addEventListenenr('click', getMoreAngry);
```

Adding or replacing nodes can be trickier. Nodes have a number of methods available which we can use to change the structure of the document, but these all work around the relationships in the DOM tree.

Here is an implementation of CAT REVENGE. When I click on any of these pictures of pups, I want to replace them with my cat. Any dogs that I have replaced should be put into the doggy graveyard.

```html
<script>
    const dogs = document.getElementsByClassName('dog');
    const dogArr = [...dogs];
    const cat = document.getElementById('cat');
    const killingfields = document.getElementById('killingfields');
    const graveyard = document.getElementById('graveyard')
    dogArr.forEach((dog) => dog.addEventListener('click', () => {
      const deadDog = killingfields.replaceChild(cat, dog)
      graveyard.appendChild(deadDog);
    }))
</script>
```

Here you should see how `replaceChild` takes two arguments - the replacement and the replaced, and returns the replaced element so you still have access to it. It is then added to a parent with `appendChild`.

We may also want to create new nodes. I want the number of rabbits on my page to double every time I click on any of them. This will quickly get out of control as we have insane bunny growth, but let's try and reason it out.

Ensure that you create a new node for each iteration in your loop - a node can only be in one place.

```js
function multiply() {
  const farm = document.getElementById('farm');
  const rabbits = [...document.getElementsByTagName('img')];
  rabbits.forEach(rabbit => {
    const rabbitNode = document.createElement('img');
    rabbitNode.src =
      'https://cedarmountvets.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/meLzO2i-e1402927793591.jpg';
    rabbitNode.addEventListener('click', multiply);
    farm.appendChild(rabbitNode);
  });
}
```

In this version, we have recreated all the attributes on the new element with .src and .addEventListener. A neater way to do this would be with .cloneElement:

```js
const newRabbit = rabbit.cloneNode();
```

(Note .cloneNode takes a 'deep' argument if you want to clone all child nodes too!)